This CD-ROM includes two images of Sprite boot disks that can be
used to boot Sprite on your workstation. To do this you will need
two things:

	1) A DECstation 5000/200 or a SparcStation 2.
	2) A SCSI disk of at least 100 MB in size which does not contain
	   any information you wish to keep in any of its partitions.

The DECstation boot image is in the file ds5000.bt and the SparcStation
is in sun4.bt.  Hook your disk up to a convenient machine and put
the boot image onto the disk, starting at the beginning of the
disk. On a Unix system you can use the "dd" program, e.g. :

    dd if=sun4.bt of=/dev/rsd00c    (or whatever device is appropriate)

Make sure you dd to the beginning of the disk. If you try to put
it into a partition that doesn't start at the beginning of the disk
you won't be able to boot from it. You may also want to specify a
large block size for the dd so it runs quicker.

Once the boot image has been written to the disk attach the disk
to your intended Sprite workstation. The disk must be SCSI target #0. 
Once the disk is attached reboot your machine. Read the rest of
this file before you do so, however, since you need to have the
answers to several questions handy.
On a DECstation boot using: boot 5/rz0/vmsprite
On a SparcStation 2 boot using: boot /sbus/esp/sd@0,0 vmsprite

Sprite should begin booting. As part of the boot a configuration
script will be run that asks you a bunch of questions about your
particular machine and environment:

    Host name (required)
    Host ethernet address (required)
    Host internet address (required)
    Host internet domain (required)
    Internet subnet mask (optional)
    Internet name of a gateway on the same network (optional)
    Gateway's ethernet address (optional)
    Gateway's internet address (optional)
    Internet address of a nameserver (optional)

Sprite will then initialize various configuration files and continue
booting.  You can log in to Sprite as root, with no password.  You
can then start up X windows with "xinit", or run other Unix commands.

The bootable Sprite image is meant to be a demonstration of Sprite, not
a robust Sprite system.  There are several missing things, such as floating
point and network support.

If vi complains about "redraw", you may have to do "unsetenv EXINIT".
