From ts@uwasa.fi Tue 9 Jun 18:05:00 1992
Subject: The public nature of garbo.uwasa.fi questions and answers 

This file is garbo.uwasa.fi:/pc/pd2/private.txt

Dear Fellow Computer Users,

I feel it advisable to inform the gentle garbo.uwasa.fi users of the
following matter concerning privacy / publicity.  I get very much
email concerning garbo.uwasa.fi files and problems and UseNet news. 
As an FTP archive site moderator I have to answer countless
questions and views from the users practically every day.  Quite
often these questions or views are of general interest or
applicability, and I often make selected questions and my answers
public in the /pc/pd2/post*.txt information files, and sometimes
even on the UseNet news.  The same goes for useful user feedback on
the programs on garbo.  Furthermore I may have to converse about
some users' questions with my fellow moderators at garbo.uwasa.fi
and other FTP sites. 

This means that unless prominently and unambiguously stated
otherwise by the sender (at the very beginning of the message,
please), or very obvious from the context or the contents, I
consider all email, all text in the upload announcements, and all
file uploads publicly available and publicly publishable material. 
I simply cannot and will not take the time to ask for the sender's
confirmation.  I hope you understand, and if you find this
unacceptable, then there is unfortunately no other possibility than
not to send email to me. 

Please particularly note that if you have kindly uploaded programs
to garbo.uwasa.fi, you should never put anything confidential in
your upload announcements to the garbo moderators.  If you have
something confidential to say about your upload, please use separate
email for that, and mark very, very clearly that you message is not
for public distribution. 

The reason for these practices is that we get so much email,
uploads, announcements, questions and views, that if we conversed
back and forth with each and everyone about their material and
messages, we would be totally swamped because we already are
stretched as we are.  I have to organize matters in a rational way
to be able to perform the moderator's functions, and making public
the interesting questions from users and the answers to their
queries is part of this. 

   All the best, Timo

..................................................................
Prof. Timo Salmi
Moderating at garbo.uwasa.fi anonymous FTP archives 128.214.87.1
Faculty of Accounting & Industrial Management; University of Vaasa
Internet: ts@uwasa.fi Bitnet: salmi@finfun   ; SF-65101, Finland
